ADR001 Represent Software Architecture in Directory Structure
=============================================================

Context
-------

The software architecture suggests to [separate different parts of the code][CA].
How shall this separation be represented in the organization of the source files in the file system?

Decision
--------

- All source code belonging to a package shall be within a directory representing that package.
  In combination with [automatically generated directory dependency graphs][DDG] it is then easy to see
  if the [Dependency Rule for packages][DR] is violated.
- Further encapsulation within package directories as components is encouraged but not necessary.
- Also it is encouraged to place header files in a different directory than the rest of the compound
  (package, component, module, ...) implementation.
  This allows to hide implementation details from the publicly available interfaces.

Example directory structure:

```plain
.
├── package_a
│   ├── header_1.hpp
│   └── src
│       └── source_1.cpp
└── package_b
    ├── component_x
    │   ├── header_2.hpp
    │   └── source_2.cpp
    └── component_y
        ├── header_3.hpp
        └── src
            ├── …
            └── source_4.cpp
```

In the example above:

- `package_a` has no further nesting in compounds, but hides the implementation details in a subdirectory `src`.
- `package_b` has its content structured into two components.
- Every compound may have any number of header files.

Consequences
------------

The current code will have to be restructured.

Future analysis of the software architecture will be simplified.

[CA]: \ref component_architecture
[DDG]: https://www.doxygen.nl/manual/diagrams.html "Doxygen documentation of graphs which can be generated."
[DR]: \ref interpretation_dependency_rule

