DR001 Represent Software Architecture in Directory Structure
============================================================

Context
-------

The software architecture suggests to [separate different parts of the code](<\ref component_architecture> "reference to 'Component Architecture' in Doxygen documentation").
How shall this separation be represented in the organization of the source files in the file system?

Decision
--------

- All source code belonging to a package shall be within a directory representing that package.
  In combination with [automatically generated directory dependency graphs][DDG] it is then easy to see
  if the [Dependency Rule for packages](<\ref interpretation_dependency_rule> "reference to ' Interpretation of the Dependency Rule' in Doxygen documentation") is violated.
- Further encapsulation within package directories, for example using 'components', is encouraged but not necessary.
- Also, for every compound (package, component, module, ...) implementation, it is encouraged to
  place the source files in a different subdirectory than the public header files.
  For example by moving the source files into a `src` subdirectory of that compound.
  Or by separating the files into `include` and `src` subdirectories of that compound.
  This allows to hide implementation details from the publicly available interfaces.

Example directory structure:

```plain
.
├── package_a
│   ├── header_1.hpp
│   └── src
│       └── source_1.cpp
├── package_b
│   └── include
│       └── header_2.hpp
│   └── src
│       └── source_2.cpp
└── package_b
    ├── component_x
    │   ├── header_3.hpp
    │   └── source_3.cpp
    └── component_y
        ├── header_4.hpp
        └── src
            ├── source_4.cpp
            ├── header_implementation_detail.cpp
            └── …
```

In the example above:

- `package_a` has no further nesting in compounds, but hides the implementation details in a subdirectory `src`.
- `package_b` puts public headers in a subdirectory `include` and the implementation details in a subdirectory `src`.
- `package_c` has its content structured into two components.
- Every compound may have any number of header files.

Consequences
------------

The current code will have to be restructured.

Future analysis of the software architecture will be simplified.

[DDG]: https://www.doxygen.nl/manual/diagrams.html "Doxygen documentation of graphs which can be generated."
